---
title: "Types as Propositions in Typescript"
date: "2023-09-05T22:12:03.284Z"
categories: continuations
---

Propositions as types correspondance (PAT) (or Types as Propositions) is one of the most 
intriguing discoveries of Computer Science. The gist of it is:

- In Logic land, you often see stuff like `P is True`. Here, `P` can stand for some 
statement that can be true or false. And a Proof is constructed to back the statement.
- In code, we've got something like: `let x: T = term;`.

The correspondance is basically saying Logic and Programming are two sides of the same coin:

- In Logic: When you claim something is true, you must provide a Proof for it.
- In code: If you got a type and want to use it, you create a term of that type.

It's as if we were writing `let x: P = proof;` in TypeScript. And it's not just some 
quirky coincidence. If we restrict ourself to a pure subset TypeScript, you'll see 
you can write logical proofs using code.

## Code's Take on Logic Constructs

First let's review quickly the key concepts in Logic, they work pretty much like the booleans 
we use in programming:

  - `True` or `⊤`: This represents a proposition that's always true. 
  - `False` or `⊥`: signifies something that's never true.
  - `A ∨ B` : A disjunction. True if either `A` or `B` hold true. Could be both.
  - `A ∧ B` : A conjunction. Both `A` and `B` must be true.
  - `A -> B` : Logical implication. If `A` is true, then `B` is consequently true.
  - `!A` : negation, a Proposition that's true if `A` is not.

There's also `A <=> B`. It's essentially stating that `A` implies `B` and `B` implies `A`. 
In other words, `(A -> B) ∧ (B -> A)`. 

Now for each one of the above constructs we have an equivalent type in Typescript.

`True` corresponds to any inhabitated type

```ts
type True = unknown;
```

>>We could use a singleton type like `null` or `undefined`. But with the `unknown` type, 
we can assign any value to it.

`False` translates to an uninhabited type in TypeScript. This mirrors the fact that there's no
proof for a false proposition in Logic:

```ts
type False = never;
```

`A ∨ B` corresponds to a discriminated union type in TypeScript. 

```ts
type Or<A, B> = 
  | { tag: "left"; value: A } 
  | { tag: "right"; value: B };
```

We'll also write two constructor functions:

```ts
function left<A>(value: A): Or<A, never> {
  return { tag: "left", value };
}

function right<B>(value: B): Or<never, B> {
  return { tag: "right", value };
}
```

And a helper for case analysis:

```ts
function either<A, B, C>(
  or: Or<A, B>,
  onLeft: (a: A) => C,
  onRight: (b: B) => C,
): C {

  return (
    or.tag === "left" 
      ? onLeft(or.value) 
      : onRight(or.value)
  );
}
```

`A ∧ B` corresponds to a pair of types:

```ts
type And<A, B> = [A, B];
```

Logical implications translate to function types:

```ts
type Imp<A, B> = (a: A) => B;
```

Finally, The equivalence `A <=> B` corresponds to a pair of 2 functions.
It's a sort of 2-way conversion between `A` and `B`

```ts
type Iff<A, B> = [Imp<A, B>, Imp<B, A>];
```

So far, everything's been kinda familiar, right? But with negation, things are getting a bit wild.


## Negative types

Let's start by unpacking the meaning of `False`/`never`. The `never` type acts as a universal subtype, 
as it can be assigned to any other type.

You might wonder about the meaning of `any` here. Intriguingly, `any` stands as a proposition 
that is both `True` and `False` at once. This duality allows any value to be assigned to it, 
making it akin to `unknown` or `True`. On the flip side, it can fit into any type (except `never`), 
reflecting the nature of `never` or `False`.

In logical discourse, a proposition that holds as true and false simultaneously is labeled 
a *contradiction*. If one can prove a contradiction,  the whole logic system just falls apart. 
In a parallel sense, being able to produce terms of type `any` compromises the 
soundness of the type system. As highlighted in the TypeScript documentation, the 
flexibility of `any` sacrifices type safety. 

This brings us to the concept of **Proof by contradiction**: To disprove a proposition `A` 
(or to assert `!A`), one assumes `A` is true and then demonstrates that this assumption leads 
to a contradiction.. In essence, `!A` equates to `A -> False`.

Hence, negating a type `A` in TypeScript translates to the function `(x: A) => never`.

```ts
type Not<A> = (x: A) => never;
```


## Double negation, paradoxes and the halting problem

Constructing a term of type `A -> never` poses challenges though. How can we return a `never` value when, 
by definition, `never` lacks any values?

One way to produce a negative type in Typescript is by writing a non terminating function. For example: 

```ts
function forever<A>(a: A) {
  return forever(a);
}
// typeof forever = <A>(a: A) => never
```

Typesript detects that the function never terminates and assigns to it a type of `<A>(a: A) => never`.
(There are alternative methods to create functions that don't return,
but remember we're operating within a limited TypeScript subset here).

Is this type designation genuinely *accurate* from a logical standpoint?

Consider the following function

```ts
function double_neg<A>(ff: (callback: (a: A) => never) => never): A {
  //
  function wait_forever(a: A): never {
    return wait_forever(a);
  }

  return ff(wait_forever);
}
```

A closer look at the type reveals it corresponds to `Not<Not<A>> => A`. This is just the *double
negation law* in Logic: `!!A = A`. 

The implementation exploits the fact that `never` can be assigned to any type `A`. Now we should 
be able to use our double negation in our code to turn values of type `!!A` into values of type `A`:

```ts
const a = double_neg(k => k(5));

let b = a + 2;
// ...
```

However an issue arises:  the statement `let b = a + 2;` is never reached. Upon entering `double_neg`, the body 
invokes `k(5)` where `k` represents the non terminating function `wait_forever`. The program remains trapped 
there indefinitely.

The core issue with `wait_forever` is its endless recursion. It's like an infinite loop that keeps 
running without an exit condition. In Logic, infinite loops can give birth to tricky paradoxes, 
like this classic:

>>This statement is false

This is the essence of the *liar paradox*. If you try to reason through it, you'll get stuck in 
a endless cycle of contradictions. Give it a try!

1. **If we assume that `statement` is true**, then the statement 
must be false as it claims to be. But then it contradicts our own assumption that 
the statement was true.

2. **If we assume that `statement` is false**, then it's ironically being truthful 
about its falsehood, making it true. Again, this is a contradiction because we 
just assumed it was false.

The self-referencing nature of the statement is the real troublemaker here. It creates a 
loop where the truth value keeps toggling between true and false, never settling, similar 
to how a piece of code is stuck in an infinite loop.

This is bad for Logic, which requires every proof to be finite. What this says in reality is 
that `wait_forever` is not exactly the function we're seeking for our negative types.

A more Logic freindly interpretation of negation is actually possible, and would allow writing programs
in *double negation style*. To see how, let's revisit our earlier example:

```ts
const a = double_neg(k => k(5));

let b = a + 2;
// ...
```

The double negation principle, `!!A = A`, hints that the program should progress beyond the initial line, 
assigning a number type to `a`. Which number? In this context, `5` seems like a logical choice.

But then, what's the role of the `k` argument, and how do we instantiate it?

Here's the twist: `k` isn't a function we can implement by ourselves. **It has to be provided**
to us by the programming language.

This isn't just a normal function, It belongs to a special 
class known as *continuations*. Think of a continuation as a snapshot of a program's 
future from a particular moment. For example, consider this code:

```ts
// assume f : (n: number) => number
const a = f(5);

let b = a + 2;
// ...
```

Now, let's transform it into a continuation-passing style (CPS):

```ts
f(5, (a) => {

  let b = a + 2;
  // ...
})
```

In the CPS style, every function receives an extra `k` argument, which represents the program's subsequent steps.

Our `double_neg`, by converting from `Not<Not<A>>` to `A`, essentially transforms a CPS function call into 
a standard value of type `A`. It achieves this by encapsulating the program's future steps and repackaging 
them into a function awaiting a value to proceed.

While non-terminating functions and continuations both return `never`, continuations avoid 
embedding self-referential inconsistencies **within** our system. By the time the 
function concludes, the program has also concluded.

That means to make values of type `Not<A>`, our programming language should equip us with 
something to encapsulate the program's subsequent steps as a continuation. 

Although TypeScript doesn't natively support this construct, for the sake of discussion, 
let's pretend it does:

```ts
declare function double_neg<A>(f: Not<Not<A>>): A;
```

>>While the double negation principle might feel intuitive, I should mention it's not something 
universally accepted. Some logicians believe that just because a statement isn't proven doesn't 
mean the opposite holds true. Think of it as "absence of evidence isn't evidence of absence." 
This viewpoint is held by *intuitionistic logic*.
>>
>>In contrast *classical Logic* embraces the double negation law. But as we've observed, 
to embed this principle in a programming language, we need a control operator to
turn double negation into identity. This hints at a deep connection between the context 
in which a program runs and the foundational logic underpinning it.

If you've dabbled with Lisp-like languages (like Scheme or Clojure), you might've bumped 
into a cousin of `double_neg` named `call/cc` (though its type is a bit different).

## Diving into Logical Proofs using TypeScript

Having established a bridge between Logic's concepts and our TypeScript subset, 
We're ready to weild this knowledge to perform some common proofs in Logic.

The most elementary proof is the tautology `A => A`. This is just the identity function

```ts
function id<A>(a: A) {
  return a;
}
```

Let's see some more interesting proofs.

We'll define all our proofs in a generic function, to abstract over propostions `A` and `B`.

```ts
function context<A, B>() {
  //
  type NotA = Not<A>;

  type NotB = Not<B>;

  // ... subsequent proofs will be populated here
}
```


### Law of Excluded Middle (`A ∨ !A <=> True`)

The law of excluded middle is a foundational principle in classical logic, 
which asserts that any proposition is either true or its negation is true. 
There's no in-between state.

Let's first write the implementation:

```ts
// A ∨ !A
const excluded_middle: Or<A, NotA> = 
  double_neg(k => 
    k(right(a => 
      k(left(a))
    ))
  );
```

To construct a value of type `A ∨ !A`, we have 2 choices:

1. Constructing `A`: Creating an instance of an arbitrary type `A` is unfeasible. 
It's like attempting to materialize something from nothing.

2. On the other hand, creating an instance of `!A` is feasible. To understand 
this, recall that `!A` is synonymous with a continuation of type `(a:A) -> never`.
So we'll need the help of `double_neg`.

Here's the step-by-step breakdown of the implementation:

1. Invoke `double_neg` and capture the current continuation as `k`.
2. Inside the continuation, the next plausible action is to make use 
of `right` to indicate we're choosing the negation path. This gives: `k(right(a => _))`.
3. Now, inside our function `(a => _)`, we need to return a value of type `never`. 
The one tool we have at our disposal to achieve this effect is the captured 
continuation `k`. Since we now have access to a value of type `A` (through the function argument), 
we can use `k` to redirect our flow to the other branch, i.e., `left(A)`. 
This is expressed as: `k(left(a))`.

This construction can look mind-bending, especially if encountered for 
the first time. It's somewhat analogous to a closed time-like loop in physics, 
where cause and effect blur.

In [one of his papers](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/dual/dual.pdf), Philipe Wadler, 
illustrates the above behavior:

>>The following story illustrates this behavior. (With apologies to Peter Selinger, 
who tells a similar story about a king,
a wizard, and the Philosopher’s stone.)
>> 
>>Once upon a time, the devil approached a man and made
an offer: “Either (a) I will give you one billion dollars, or (b)
I will grant you any wish if you pay me one billion dollars.
Of course, I get to choose whether I offer (a) or (b).
>>
>> The man was wary. Did he need to sign over his soul?
No, said the devil, all the man need do is accept the offer.
>>
>>The man pondered. If he was offered (b) it was unlikely
that he would ever be able to buy the wish, but what was
the harm in having the opportunity available?
“I accept,” said the man at last. “Do I get (a) or (b)?”
The devil paused. “I choose (b).”
>>
>>The man was disappointed but not surprised. That was
that, he thought. But the offer gnawed at him. Imagine
what he could do with his wish! Many years passed, and
the man began to accumulate money. To get the money he
sometimes did bad things, and dimly he realized that this
must be what the devil had in mind. Eventually he had his
billion dollars, and the devil appeared again.
>>
>>“Here is a billion dollars,” said the man, handing over a
valise containing the money. “Grant me my wish!”
The devil took possession of the valise. Then he said,
“Oh, did I say (b) before? I’m so sorry. I meant (a). It is
my great pleasure to give you one billion dollars.”
>>
>>And the devil handed back to the man the same valise
that the man had just handed to him.

Lastly, an important takeaway is that the `double_neg` function anchors this logic 
in the domain of classical logic. In intuitionistic logic, which is more conservative 
about claims of truth or falsity, such a construction might not hold true. Here, 
if you cannot furnish a proof for `A`, it doesn't automatically mean `A` is false. 
It simply means that the truth value of `A` remains undetermined.

### `A ∧ !A -> False`

A proposition and its negation cannot both be true simultaneously.

```ts
// A ∧ !A -> False
const neg_law: Imp<And<A, NotA>, False> = ([a, notA]) => notA(a);
```

In code, this means we can just smash matter and antimatter together and 
watch them annihilate.


### Are Functions Essentially Discriminated Unions?

Here's a thought-provoking equivalence:

**`A -> B <=> !A ∨ B`**

It basically says a function `A -> B` is equivalent to an union of a 
continuation expecting `A` and a value `B`.

Let's see what this means in code.


From `(A -> B)` to `(!A ∨ B)`:

```ts
// Transition from (A -> B) to (!A ∨ B)
const fn_union_fwd: Imp<Imp<A, B>, Or<NotA, B>> = 
  (f) =>
    double_neg(k => 
      k(left(a => 
        k(right(
          f(a)
        ))
      ))
    );
```

Utilizing the previous time-traveling maneuver, we initially yield a continuation
to solicit an `A` type. Then we use our `A -> B` function to transform the `A` into a `B` value. 
Subsequently, we reinvoke the continuation to yield the result `B` to the surroundings.


Conversely, for the transformation of a union type to a function:


```ts
// Transition from (!A ∨ B) to (A -> B)
const fn_union_bwd: Imp<Or<NotA, B>, Imp<A, B>> = 
  notA_or_B => 
    a =>
      either(
        notA_or_B,
        (notA) => notA(a),
        (b) => b,
      );
```

To morph a union type to a function, we assume an `A` argument. Then based on the 
content of our container `!A ∨ B`:

- If it's a continuation waiting for an `A`, we just present our `A` argument.
- Conversely, if it's a `B` value, we directly return it.

>>This may appear as a form of trickery. One usually expects a genuine mechanism 
to turn an `A` into a `B`. Instead, the transformation feels more like 
routing around the union, merely forwarding existing information rather than 
truly processing it.
>>
>>To be honest, I don't really have a plausible explanation. I was thinking it might be because
of classical logic quirks, but the above proof doesn't use `double_neg` so it's equally
valid in intuitionistic logic. 
>>
>>I tried to ask my freind GPT-4. Can't say it adds much but here's the answer anyway:
>>
>>"Imagine you have a box that might either contain a machine that needs some input `A` 
to work or an already finished product `B`. Now, if someone hands you an `A`, this function 
simply checks the box. If there's a machine (`notA`), it feeds the `A` to it. 
If there's a finished product `B`, it just hands it over. The function doesn't 
do the "creation" part itself, but instead relies on what's in the box. This doesn't 
feel like a trick anymore; it's more about delegation and routing based on what's available."



Wrapping up, I hope you found this dive as intriguing! If your curiosity is still piqued, 
consider tackling these additional equivalences:


I've put a [TS playground](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play?#code/PTAEDMEMBsGcFNQAcBOB7JbYEsAu20A7UQUqIAoXATyUQBUUBXRAXlAcIGtC0B3QgbjJkQoXI0SoMWPAWKASogrVEAMRgJQrQvABu8FIOFgAItlgArdgGN8RUAEFQgCiJQAIUU1QAeRQAeOwBpXAD4NUDJQUAAfUABvUUgAcwAuUAAiaHhwXFT+UG0YJhSHAF8wiOi43ESU1JRsBIALbNz86ELXUGKDMnArG2IMrL8ggApW9rsAShTvP0CtXRQQmPDQFHhcBhRiSuq0wezA8cQusmKhXsJrWTX6pp8XUeOUl2mvXwW9QMfY1fXN7axeLJNJ1RqHPIFE6Cc49Po3eB4Bp6OauQIAYVGqzQKBmvgCwX82MIABlMrgUiNIEVJhoQuiiREiAAlO4U0AjABGL1pzHpRLe6N+fw2W2II1WTJQADoqgkNMxWOlyakyhF1QB+UBEMlZEY46XHWmS9UpFls-Uyo2rSYwoSGUDoogWK79eygQDkRK53Ig7IQACaon6sADaBJcAF1uiIAJIAWyQ0GwlkgbocAFoQm4qB540ggyFWFSaXTXAYRABRACODGwrXgV19oB8fO9OcQMfA4ALoRDeYLgX7LkCdiCUaEIgAcvAEqmbgBCOw+0CTtC4YahEYADxLrc++ntImU2BQsFwoFTuHgCfPuDQyHQ-oYlkQkBXM7nulESjhrpuUGwDJ-QAfS0BJgMva8kFwEZaRWVZLmuWxwBxHQUVHYt7Dgk1-jFCBUMWKlbVWUohAids0HAfD1kWVYRHVAA9DV7QiRC3X9NAGE5DJQJnYYRi7SkU2gaBOUgSwOEpaksNLfdeRCOSil+dVQBAE02JuHhIDwYCUJovRMKmFJ92UlS1lFQEtJ0vS0JQIjBBU2EVNwwEuxGKzcF0gi9GIiJznIpRKNADiuJ4sC6LARjmIiejsEQVd1wS4YgjI0AMnPaTCAYONOT0UIQu4+BeISEYOFLDgRgAVkmYjVnS0BuVALKcry1g3wAalAAAmO0JzAJ0UHWaxgs4wqmo-N04wYM8GokdBtGwf14H9URkQfNAEhQSA4zjbBCHlaBIH2hhEngMglssQ71ggeFbAKsK+Iw8AUiSpLRyCN47HLMAYyWwh8CoNLIB4d1WyXDTbEW-jpKmUyXOISBepEABlNA40QSw0bjWxJEo2BQD20ASQ25NfyQ4hrC3AtYNMtSAo8BKHFYN6ggMen4rXFxQiSx42dUgAqQWheFkXRbF0BfobAHKCJ4H8bFhXFZF4BUvohxnFUOBEBbEIlwiTHCBmxapbwShgMOnhgIARhSTtu1mAlNYQIIR0LUAQ1SmKwHV0AncQTN7BNEY7BxP35NARFcGROyQ5QP3AkWwJIE5WAthW1tk9TlB-UmIkTREDNdacX21DOlSiNLA4iMZUBxwi90vXoJhmzB1YDaNv7pfN4HgK622uz8ANUSb+AXfsN2Pfz73PVAEfQADvX1SpANw6O-0QwABgjPOVIL+ei8b8Qg8gcOQ0geYGBE7fVjrmKlfvh-H6fhWVbo5-FffWc3Qt+X34flWIj1xJMDbUVEo6IHgFuS6DAlorV2v6f0GR64+0XG3IgM1IHQNgcBeBiD4B4lRIzN2Jp7pFTAqVUsJoIgVTBE0KklCzLqgqlXE+kwqGgBqiaWqXsG6gEXPvEuWs0GG3PGBbuPBbYJkHoGAkRDAh+zdiMM+8w1x2AjOHbguA7D2WEH-PR+jH6vzvu-UARhEAAFkcSzkIAAcnxsAngv8DFiwAapMA85g7F1eC3EI-CvTzjcPrdB54lrYxQNY62-duxJQdt8IIY8-SBhZoEHm8SJ5Tz4Z45w3iA5+L4YEpeCVgKx28a2D2jCIgV1bEUkpIwWE1UCOwypnJw41JxC4EYtCYItLYYw6+jCRB5ICQIjxPtXjsKUZogkmjIzh2Du08Okdo7zJQMOJqqiVG4FeDXOu9dRkz28TrPhKCClHhxFpbOwUTzwHJpkhwXocm+JOcImaoSrFHS6rpHg-pJH5jekPcM8TAizEZikzm8TQirBGDUtepSUoqVIcVChrZ2HMPJPQlFFTQA0ItJyBhWKVxrmKbCpR58GrqKaRw3pZlOEqV8mqEQLhxIcAuStf01zbn8OcMM3JniHnUvbiE687zCCfM5N835PgQUbMJVsse-yZFxIhcwIOjMcQJThUHZR5L5LsKWQZSlaqUAaprowkYUyNGqOrpS81nNLVbK5Lndh9LAEvKFWE6xfcJYDwVQWMe0qtFgrlRPN54SPlfP9IEUNnrgLiv9BGN+zik3Jv5q-RN99QDVlrPWRsN0-y2AAGRsEILIJxBijFuPdAHLmRyuXeh4coc5kBLnsqGm6Tx1baQBxGHW8ZQSREQEIMBdgsgI2Sv7IC4FvhQXBGIeXSAXUWl0nYYi8hZVMUVLRXqN8G6sU4vBBKAl6oF2ciIpSiItKKmXrpXzRlzLWVXLbTcHtYyu0hA7VmAVwTB3DpLUQWNEqJZSIDZOoD+ZAVzvVFM4COJgJc13ce5dWL9V2XPesrRMGUBwdNRU21Wj7XaJPjhs1S7WycmI+qbhoBBU-pHf++AVYok+AnXEqdPgZ2PAnuAIddGh3gG+YEbjv7R1xoTbCe0QggA)
Where you can find other common proofs in Logic.


Happy proving!